                                                         Stuart Cheshire
Document: draft-cheshire-ipv4-linklocal-00.txt            Apple Computer
Expires 8th September 2000                                8th March 2000

            Dynamic Configuration of IPv4 link-local addresses

                 <draft-cheshire-ipv4-linklocal-00.txt>

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.  Internet-Drafts are
   working documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF),
   its areas, and its working groups.  Note that other groups may
   also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents
   at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as
   reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html

   Distribution of this memo is unlimited.

Abstract

   As the Internet Protocol continues to increase in popularity as a
   global communication system, it becomes increasingly valuable to be
   able to use familiar IP tools such as ftp for local communication as
   well. For example, two people with laptop computers with built-in
   wireless Ethernet may meet and wish to exchange files. It is
   desirable for these people to be able to use IP application software
   without the inconvenience of having to manually configure static IP
   addresses or set up a DHCP [RFC 2131] server.

   This draft describes a method by which a host may automatically
   configure an interface with an IP address in the 169.254/16 range
   that is valid for link-local communication on that interface. This
   is especially valuable in environments where no other configuration
   mechanism is available.

1. Introduction

   As the Internet Protocol continues to increase in popularity as a
   global communication system, it becomes increasingly valuable to be
   able to use familiar IP tools such as ftp for local communication as
   well. For example, two people with laptop computers with built-in
   wireless Ethernet may meet and wish to transfer files. It is
   desirable for these people to be able to use IP application software


Expires 8th September 2000     Cheshire                         [Page 1]

Internet Draft         IPv4 Link-Local Addresses         8th March 2000


   without the inconvenience of having to manually configure static IP
   addresses or set up a DHCP [RFC 2131] server.

   This draft describes a method by which a host may automatically
   configure an interface with an IP address in the 169.254/16 range
   that is valid for link-local communication on that interface. This
   is especially valuable in environments where no other configuration
   mechanism is available.

   IP datagrams whose source or destination addresses are in the
   169.254/16 range MUST NOT be sent to any router for forwarding, and
   any network device receiving such datagrams MUST NOT forward them.
   Link local address are, by definition, restricted to the local
   network segment. Allocation of link-local addresses in an IPv6
   network is described in [RFC 2462]. Similar considerations apply at
   layers above IP. For example, DNS Resource Records containing
   link-local address SHOULD NOT be sent to hosts outside the link to
   which those link-local address apply. Similarly, automatically
   generated web pages SHOULD NOT contain links with embedded link-local
   addresses if those pages are viewable from hosts outside the local
   link where the addresses are valid.

   IPv4 link-local addresses are independent from any other IPv4
   addresses that a host may have. Each interface on a host MAY have
   a link-local address in addition to zero or more other addresses
   configured by other means (e.g. manually or via a DHCP server).

   There are several reasons why it is beneficial for a host to maintain
   link-local addresses in addition to any other addresses it may have.
   For example, a DHCP server may appear on a network where hosts
   are already communicating using link-local addresses, and it is
   beneficial for those already-established link-local TCP connections
   to continue working even after the hosts have configured additional
   global addresses assigned by the DHCP server.

   Another example is that there may be networks where not all of the
   hosts have externally configured addresses. For example, a user with
   a wireless home network may have a laptop computer and an IP printer.
   The laptop computer may have both a self-configured link-local
   address and a DHCP-configured global address. The printer, in
   contrast, may have only a link-local address, because the user does
   not want the printer to be globally addressable. In this case, the
   laptop computer would access pages on the World Wide Web using its
   globally-routable address to communicate with servers world-wide, but
   print those web pages using its link-local address to communicate
   with its local printer.

   In the case where two hosts on the same link have both link-local
   addresses and global addresses, they SHOULD prefer the global


Expires 8th September 2000     Cheshire                         [Page 2]

Internet Draft         IPv4 Link-Local Addresses         8th March 2000


   addresses when establishing new communications (e.g. TCP connections)
   because their global addresses are likely to remain stable whereas
   their link-local addresses could change over time, as described in
   Section 2 below.

   A host SHOULD NOT establish communications from a global source
   address to a link-local destination address, or vice versa.
   Link-local addresses should only be used for communication with other
   link-local addresses on the same link.

1.1. Conventions Used in the Document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC 2119].

2. Choosing an IPv4 link-local address.

   When a host wishes to configure a link-local address, it selects an
   address at random, uniformly distributed in the range 169.254.1.0 to
   169.254.254.255. The IPv4 network 169.254/16 is registered with the
   IANA for this purpose. The first 256 and last 256 addresses in this
   network are reserved for future use and SHOULD NOT be selected by a
   host using this dynamic configuration mechanism.

   The random number generator algorithm should be chosen so that
   different hosts do not generate the same sequence of random numbers.
   For example, the random number generator could be seeded using
   information derived from the host's Ethernet hardware address, or
   some other information unique to each host. Seeding the random number
   generator using the real-time clock is NOT suitable for this purpose,
   since a group of hosts that are all powered on at the same time might
   then all generate the same random sequence.

   After it has selected an address, the host MUST test to see if the
   address is already in use. This test is done using ARP [RFC 826]
   probes. On link-layer network technologies that do not support ARP
   there may be equivalent mechanisms for determining whether a
   particular IP address is currently in use, but these kinds of network
   are not discussed in this draft.

   The host tests to see if the address is already in use by
   broadcasting an ARP request for the desired address. The client MUST
   fill in its own hardware address as the sender's hardware address,
   and all zeroes as the sender's IP address, to avoid polluting ARP
   caches in other hosts on the same link in the case where the address
   turns out to already be in use by another host. This ARP request with
   a sender IP address of all zeroes is referred to as an "ARP probe".



Expires 8th September 2000     Cheshire                         [Page 3]

Internet Draft         IPv4 Link-Local Addresses         8th March 2000


   The appropriate number of ARP probes and the interval between them
   may be implementation-dependent. For 10Mb/s Ethernet, four probes
   with a two-second interval is recommended. If the host receives an
   ARP response indicating that the address is currently in use, then
   the host should select a new address at random and repeat the process.

   While waiting for a possible response to this request, the client
   MUST also listen for other ARP probes for the same address
   originating from a different hardware address. This will occur if two
   (or more) hosts are attempting to configure the same link-local
   address. If the client receives a response to the ARP request, or
   sees another ARP probe for the same address, it MUST consider the
   address as being in use, and move on.

   A host SHOULD keep a counter of the number of address collisions it
   has experienced in the process of trying to acquire an address, and
   if the count becomes too high it should cease attempting to acquire
   an address. This is to prevent infinite loops in pathological failure
   cases. On 10Mb/s Ethernet, fifty consecutive failed attempts should
   be considered "too high".

   After successfully configuring a link-local address, a host on 10Mb/s
   Ethernet SHOULD send two gratuitous ARPs, spaced two seconds apart,
   this time filling in the sender IP address. The purpose of these
   gratuitous ARPs is to make sure that other hosts on the net do not
   have stale ARP cache entries left over from some other host that may
   previously have been using the same address.

   Address collision detection is not limited to the address selection
   phase, when the host is sending ARP probes and listening for replies.
   Address collision detection is an ongoing process that is in effect
   for as long as the host is using a link-local IP address. At any
   time, if a host receives an ARP packet with its own IP address given
   as the sender IP address, but a different sender hardware address,
   then the host MUST treat this as an address collision and configure a
   new link-local IP address as described above. This forced
   reconfiguration may be disruptive, causing TCP connections to be
   broken. However, it is expected that such disruptions will be rare,
   and if an inadvertent address duplication happens, then disruption of
   communication is inevitable, no matter how the addresses were
   assigned. It is not possible for two different hosts using the same
   IP address on the same network to operate reliably. Immediately
   configuring a new address as soon as the conflict is detected is the
   best way to restore useful communication as quickly as possible.

   After successfully configuring a link-local address, all subsequent
   ARP packets (replies as well as requests) containing a link-local
   source address MUST be sent using link-level broadcast instead of
   link-level unicast. This is important to enable timely detection of
   duplicate addresses, as described above.

Expires 8th September 2000     Cheshire                         [Page 4]

Internet Draft         IPv4 Link-Local Addresses         8th March 2000


   Hosts which are equipped with persistent storage should, for each
   interface, record the IP address they have selected, and on the next
   boot should use that address as their first candidate when probing.
   This increases the stability of addresses. For example, if a group
   of hosts on an isolated IP network are powered off at night, then
   when they are powered on the next morning they will all resume using
   the same addresses, instead of all picking new random addresses and
   potentially having to resolve conflicts which arise.

3. Considerations for single-homed hosts

   Some operating systems do not support a host having more than one
   active IP address at a time. These hosts may have one externally
   configured (e.g. manual or DHCP) IP address, or one self-configured
   link-local address, but not both at the same time.

   These hosts should only configure a link-local address on their
   interface when other means of configuring an address have failed. For
   example, if a host is set to obtain its address via DHCP, then after
   attempting to contact a DHCP server for a reasonable period of time
   and failing, it may elect instead to configure a link-local address.

   Having elected to configure a link-local address, these hosts MUST
   continue attempting to contact a DHCP server by sending periodic DHCP
   DISCOVER packets. The host has no way of knowing whether it is on a
   network with no DHCP service, or on a network where the DHCP server
   was temporarily inaccessible or unresponsive. If the host receives a
   response to one of its periodic DHCP DISCOVER packets, then a host
   which is incapable of supporting more than one IP address at a time
   should immediately cease using its link-local address and revert
   to normal DHCP processing to configure a server-assigned address.

   Immediate cessation of use of the link-local address may break active
   TCP connections with other link-local peers, possibly causing user
   data loss. This is why it is extremely beneficial for a host, even
   if it cannot support true multi-homing, to at least support multiple
   IP addresses on a single physical interface, so that it may maintain
   its link-local address in addition to other addresses configured
   by other means such as DHCP.

4. Considerations for multi-homed hosts

   A multi-homed host may elect to configure an IPv4 link-local address
   on only one of its active interfaces. In many situations this will be
   adequate. However, should a host wish to configure IPv4 link-local
   addresses on more than one of its active interfaces, there are some
   additional precautions it should take. Implementers who are not
   planning to support IPv4 link-local addresses on more than one
   interface at a time may skip this section.


Expires 8th September 2000     Cheshire                         [Page 5]

Internet Draft         IPv4 Link-Local Addresses         8th March 2000


   A multi-homed host MUST NOT forward IP datagrams it receives that
   have source or destination addresses in the 169.254/16 range.

   A multi-homed host should ensure that all of its links are configured
   with different link-local addresses. If the random number generator
   selects an address which is already in use on one of the host's other
   interfaces, then another address should be selected.

   A multi-homed host should also probe for, and defend, all of its
   link-local addresses on all of its active interfaces that are using
   link-local addresses. When bringing up a new interface, the host
   should first probe for all of its existing link-local addresses on
   that new interface. If any of the addresses are found to be in use
   already on the new link, then the interfaces in question must be
   reconfigured to select new unique link-local addresses. The host
   should then select a link-local address for the new interface, and
   probe on all of its active interfaces to verify that the address is
   unique. This uniqueness requirement is in order to simplify host
   application software, which typically identifies connections using
   source and destination IP addresses, not interface names. Since
   link-local addresses are only unique per-link, hosts on different
   links could be using the same link-local address. By requiring
   uniqueness of source addresses on the multi-homed host, this ensures
   that TCP connections to hosts using the same link-local destination
   addresses on different links can be disambiguated by their different
   source addresses.

   Figure 1 shows a network topology where host A has an interface on
   link X with link-local address P, and another interface on link Y
   with link-local address Q. If we allowed there to be another host, B,
   on link X which also has address Q, then when host A sends a UDP
   packet from source address P to destination address Q, it is
   ambiguous whether A intends to talk to itself, or to host B. By
   ensuring that all of a host's link-local addresses are distinct not
   only from each other, but also from all addresses currently active on
   all links that the host is connected to, we remove this ambiguity.

                  |               |
                  |  P  -----  Q  |
                  |-----| A |-----|
                  |     -----     |
                X |               | Y
                  |               |
        -----     |               |
        | B |-----|               |
        -----  Q  |               |
                  |               |

        Figure 1. Ambiguous addressing


Expires 8th September 2000     Cheshire                         [Page 6]

Internet Draft         IPv4 Link-Local Addresses         8th March 2000


   Note that it is acceptable for different hosts on different links to
   be using the same link-local address on their respective separate
   links. Figure 2 shows a network topology where host C on link X is
   using address R, while at the same time, host D on link Y is also
   using address R. This is entirely in keeping with the concept of
   link-local addresses. Link-local addresses are only unique amongst
   the member hosts of a single link. Hosts C and D are not on the same
   link, hence there is no requirement for them to have distinct
   addresses. Note that in this case, host A is still able to
   communicate with both hosts C and D, because a packet sent from
   source address P to destination address R travels on link X to host
   C, and a packet sent from source address Q to destination address R
   travels on link Y to host D. TCP connections are uniquely identified
   by the source and destination addresses and port numbers, not just by
   the destination address and port number alone. To support link-local
   addressing on multiple interfaces simultaneously, the network
   software API must allow applications to bind endpoints to a desired
   source address as well as specifying the desired destination address
   for a TCP connection. Networking implementations that only allow the
   destination address to be specified should limit themselves to
   configuring only one interface for link-local addressing.

                  |               |
                  |  P  -----  Q  |
                  |-----| A |-----|
                  |     -----     |
                X |               | Y
                  |               |
        -----     |               |     -----
        | C |-----|               |-----| D |
        -----  R  |               |  R  -----
                  |               |

        Figure 2. Acceptable addressing

5. Considerations for joining of previously separate networks

   Hosts on disjoint network links may unknowingly configure the same
   link-local addresses. If these separate network links are later
   joined or bridged together, then there may be two hosts which are now
   on the same link, trying to use the same address. When either host
   attempts to communicate with any other host on the network, it will
   at some point broadcast an ARP packet which will enable the hosts in
   question to detect that there is a duplicate address.

   If a host receives an ARP packet with its own IP address given as the
   sender IP address, but a different sender hardware address, then the
   host must treat this as an address collision and configure a new
   link-local IP address as described in Section 2 above.


Expires 8th September 2000     Cheshire                         [Page 7]

Internet Draft         IPv4 Link-Local Addresses         8th March 2000


   This forced reconfiguration may be disruptive, causing TCP
   connections to be broken. However, it is expected that such
   disruptions will be rare. It should be relatively uncommon for
   networks to be joined while hosts on those networks are active. Also,
   65024 addresses are available for link-local use, so even when two
   small networks are joined, the chance of collision for any given host
   is fairly small. When joining two large networks there is a greater
   chance of collision, but large networks are not expected to rely
   heavily on link-local addresses for normal communication. Large
   networks are better managed by using existing mechanisms such as DHCP
   servers to allocate addresses.

6. Current Vendor Implementations

   As of this writing, Microsoft and Apple have operating systems that
   contain this functionality. Descriptions of the implementations are
   listed below.

6.1. Apple Mac OS 8.5 and later.

   Mac OS versions up to and including Mac OS 9 are single-homed
   systems. They support one externally configured IP address, or one
   self-configured link-local address, but not both at the same time. As
   a result, they will give up their link-local address when a working
   DHCP server is found on the network.

   Mac OS sends four DHCP DISCOVER packets, with timeouts of 1, 2, 4, 8,
   seconds. When no response is received from all of these requests (15
   seconds), it will self-configure a link-local address. After
   successfully configuring a link-local address, Mac OS continues to
   attempt to locate a DHCP server, sending DHCP DISCOVER packets every
   five minutes.

6.2. Microsoft Windows 98 and later.

   Windows 98 is a single-homed system. It supports one externally
   configured IP address, or one self-configured link-local address, but
   not both at the same time. As a result, it will give up its
   link-local address when a working DHCP server is found on the
   network.

   Windows 98 sends four DHCP DISCOVER packets, with an inter-packet
   interval of 6 seconds. When no response is received after all 4
   packets (24 seconds), it will self-configure a link-local address.
   After successfully configuring a link-local address, Windows 98
   continues to attempt to locate a DHCP server, sending DHCP DISCOVER
   packets every five minutes.




Expires 8th September 2000     Cheshire                         [Page 8]

Internet Draft         IPv4 Link-Local Addresses         8th March 2000


7. Security Considerations

   The use of this functionality may open a network host to new attacks.
   In particular, a host that previously did not have an IP address, and
   no IP stack running, was not susceptible to IP-based attacks. By
   configuring a working address, the host may now be vulnerable to
   IP-based attacks.

   The ARP protocol [RFC 826] is insecure. A malicious host may send
   fraudulent ARP packets on the network, interfering with the correct
   operation of other hosts. For example, it is easy for a host to
   answer all ARP requests with responses giving its own hardware
   address, thereby claiming ownership of every address on the network.

8. Acknowledgements

   I'd like to thank Ryan Troll for his help in this process of
   documenting the use of link-local addresses by Mac OS and Microsoft
   Windows.

   I'd like to thank Peter Ford for his contributions, implementing IPv4
   link-local addresses in Microsoft Windows, and making the
   implementation information available in this document.

   I'd like to thank Erik Guttman for his comments on the draft.

9. Copyright

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society 8th March 2000.
   All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published and
   distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any kind,
   provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.




Expires 8th September 2000     Cheshire                         [Page 9]

Internet Draft         IPv4 Link-Local Addresses         8th March 2000


   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

10. References

   [RFC 826]  Plummer, D. "An Ethernet Address Resolution Protocol -or-
              Converting Network Addresses to 48-bit Ethernet Address
              for Transmission on Ethernet Hardware", STD 37, RFC 826,
              November 1982.

   [RFC 2119] S. Bradner, "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", RFC 2119, March 1997

   [RFC 2131] Droms, R., "Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol", RFC 2131,
              March 1997

   [RFC 2462] Thomson, S. and Narten, T., "IPv6 Stateless Address
              Autoconfiguration", RFC 2462, December 1998

11. Author's Address

   Stuart Cheshire
   Apple Computer, Inc.
   1 Infinite Loop
   Cupertino
   California 95014
   USA

   Phone: +1 408 974 3207
   EMail: cheshire@apple.com

















Expires 8th September 2000     Cheshire                        [Page 10]


Stuart Cheshire <cheshire@apple.com>
 * <A HREF="http://ResComp.Stanford.EDU/~cheshire/">Web Page</A>
 * Wizard Without Portfolio, Apple Computer

